# Exercises for Chapter 1, Section 1

**Exercise 1.1.**  Below is a sequence of expressions. What is the result printed by the interpreter in response to each expression? Assume that the sequence is to be evaluated in the order in which it is presented.

```scheme
10
(+ 5 3 4)
(- 9 1)
(/ 6 2)
(+ (* 2 4) (- 4 6))
(define a 3)
(define b (+ a 1))
(+ a b (* a b))
(= a b)
(if (and (> b a) (< b (* a b)))
    b
    a)
(cond ((= a 4) 6)
      ((= b 4) (+ 6 7 a))
      (else 25))
(+ 2 (if (> b a) b a))
(* (cond ((> a b) a)
         ((< a b) b)
         (else -1))
   (+ a 1))
```

**Answer 1.1.**

```
> 10
10

> (+ 5 3 4)
12

> (- 9 1)
8

> (/ 6 2)
3

> (+ (* 2 4) (- 4 6))
6

> (define a 3)
Value: a

> (define b (+ a 1))
Value: b

> (+ a b (* a b))
19

> (= a b)
#f

> (if (and (> b a) (< b (* a b)))
>     b
>     a)
4

> (cond ((= a 4) 6)
>       ((= b 4) (+ 6 7 a))
>       (else 25))
16

> (+ 2 (if (> b a) b a))
6

> (* (cond ((> a b) a)
>          ((< a b) b)
>          (else -1))
>    (+ a 1))
16
```

-----

**Exercise 1.3.**

Define a procedure that takes three numbers as arguments and returns
the sum of the squares of the two larger numbers. 

**Answer 1.3**

```scheme
(define (sum-square-the-larger-two a b c)
	(cond ((and (<= a b) (<= a c)) (+ (* b b) (* c c)))
	      ((and (<= b a) (<= b c)) (+ (* a a) (* c c)))
	      ((and (<= c a) (<= c b)) (+ (* a a) (* b b)))))
```

-----

**Exercise 1.4.**

Observe that our model of evaluation allows for combinations whose
operators are compound expressions. Use this observation to describe
the behavior of the following procedure:

```scheme
(define (a-plus-abs-b a b)
  ((if (> b 0) + -) a b))
```

**Answer 1.4.**

The procedure `a-plus-abs-b` does precisely what its procedure name  indicates:
sums the first argument with the absolute value of the second argument. It
accomplishes this task in a clever way, using a compound conditional expression
as an operator. Rather than define an `abs` procedure to take the absolute
value of the second argument, `a-plus-abs-b` varies its operator depending on
the value of `b`: if `b > 0`, the operator evaluates to `+`; otherwise, the
operator evaluates to `-`. Functionally, this move accomplishes an "anonymous"
absolute value procedure... nifty!

-----

**Exercise 1.5.**

Ben Bitdiddle has invented a test to determine whether the interpreter he is
faced with is using applicative-order evaluation or normal-order evaluation.
He defines the following two procedures: 

```scheme
(define (p) (p))

(define (test x y)
  (if (= x 0)
      0
      y))
```

Then he evaluates the expression

```scheme
(test 0 (p))
```

What behavior will Ben observe with an interpreter that uses applicative-order
evaluation? What behavior will he observe with an interpreter that uses
normal-order evaluation? Explain your answer. (Assume that the evaluation rule
for the special form `if` is the same whether the interpreter is using normal or
applicative order: The predicate expression is evaluated first, and the result
determines whether to evaluate the consequent or the alternative expression.) 

**Answer 1.5.**

If the interpreter uses applicative-order evaluation ("evaluate arguments,
then apply"), it will get caught in an empty loop when it tries to run the
expression to be evaluated (`(test 0 (p))`): since the interpreter wants to
evaluate all arguments ahead of time, it will recurse endlessly trying to
define `p`.

If the interpreter uses normal-order evaluation (or "lazy evaluation"), on the
other hand, the procedure will execute normally and return a value of 0. Since
in this case the interpreter is waiting to evaluate expressions until they are
required by a primitive operation, it will never actually be forced to evaluate
the endlessly recursive expression `(p)`.

-----

**Exercise 1.6.**

Alyssa P. Hacker doesn't see why `if` needs to be provided as a special form.
"Why can't I just define it as an ordinary procedure in terms of `cond`?" she
asks. Alyssa's friend Eva Lu Ator claims this can indeed be done, and she
defines a new version of `if`:

```scheme
(define (new-if predicate then-clause else-clause)
  (cond (predicate then-clause)
        (else else-clause)))
```

Eva demonstrates the program for Alyssa:

```
> (new-if (= 2 3) 0 5)
5

> (new-if (= 1 1) 0 5)
0
```

Delighted, Alyssa uses `new-if` to rewrite the square-root program:

```scheme
(define (sqrt-iter guess x)
  (new-if (good-enough? guess x)
          guess
          (sqrt-iter (improve guess x)
                     x)))
```

 What happens when Alyssa attempts to use this to compute square roots?
 Explain. 

 **Answer 1.6.**

 When Alyssa attempts to run this procedure, it will get caught in an infinite
 loop.

 The advantage to `if` being provided as a special form is that it evaluates
 its arguments differently than procedures do: rather than follow strict
 applicative-order evaluation (where every argument of every sub-expression
 must be evaluated before the procedure is executed), `if` only evaluates the
 alternative if the predicate evaluates to `false`.

 In this particular case, since `new-if` is a procedure and not a special form,
 it will continue trying to fully evaluate all sub-expressions of `sqrt-iter`
 and hence get caught in an infinite loop.

 One interesting footnote to this case is that `cond`, as a special form, also
 circumvents true applicative-order evaluation: for each successive case, it
 will only evaluate if the current case evaluates to `false`. Since `new-if`
 wraps `cond` in a procedure, however, this property of `cond` gets lost. If
 Alyssa had instead used `cond` directly in the definition of `sqrt-iter`,
 skipping the procedure definition of `new-if`, the `sqrt-iter` procedure would
 have executed successfully.

 -----

 **Exercise 1.7.**

 The `good-enough?` test used in computing square roots will not be very
 effective for finding the square roots of very small numbers. Also, in real
 computers, arithmetic operations are almost always performed with limited
 precision. This makes our test inadequate for very large numbers. Explain
 these statements, with examples showing how the test fails for small and large
 numbers.


 **Answer 1.7.**

 Claim 1: "The `good-enough?` test used in computing square roots will not be
 very effective for finding the square roots of very small numbers." This is
 because our threshold is set to be within 0.001 of the square; if the square
 itself is <0.001, our test will never pass in any condition. `(sqrt 0.0001)`
 serves as an example of this case.

 Claim 2: "In real computers, arithmetic operations are almost always performed
 with limited precision. This makes our test inadequate for very large numbers."
 Since machines cannot represent small differences between very large numbers,
 the threshold case will again never pass. Trying to find the square root of `1
 x 10^15` serves as an example of this case.

 -----

 **Exercise 1.8.**

Newton's method for cube roots is based on the fact that if y is an
approximation to the cube root of x, then a better approximation is given by
the value:

```
((x/y^2) + 2y) / 3
```

Use this formula to implement a cube-root procedure analogous to the square-root procedure.

**Answer 1.8.**

```scheme
(define (cube x)
    (* x x x))

(define (good-enough? guess x)
    (< (- (cube guess) x) 0.001))

(define (improve guess x)
    (/ (+ (/ x (exp guess 2)) (* 2 guess)) 3))

(define (cbrt-iter guess x)
    (if (good-enough? guess x)
        guess
        (cbrt-iter (improve guess x) x)))
```
