# Selected exercises for chapter 1

#### 1.3 What's a domain?

A "domain" (also known as a "type") is a set of possible values for an
attribute. Example domains might include "the set of all integers," "the set of
all real numbers," "the set of all social security numbers," or "the
set of all first names beginning with the letter B." (That last one is unlikely
to appear in the real world, but it's a domain nonetheless!)

#### 1.4 What do you understand by the term _referential integrity_?

"Referential integrity" is a general constraint that applies to all relations
under the relational model, no matter what the database context might be. The
constraint specifies that foreign key values in one relation must always match
a corresponding key in the referenced relation (i.e. there can be no unmatched
foreign keys in a relation).

#### 1.6 Distinguish between the two meanings of the term _data model_.

The term "data model" references two distinct types of abstraction that
a database designer needs to be aware of:

1. In the first sense, "data model" refers to the _logical system_ under which
   the data is stored, providing a means by which a database designer can store
   and retrieve information and ask questions about that information. The
   relational model is a data model in this sense, as is the graph data model,
   and the key-value data model.

2. In the second sense, "data model" refers to the specific definition of data
   within an application domain. In social network analysis, for example, the
   data model might involve relations that store information about users,
   relations that store information about different types of friend
   relationships, and relations that store information about hobbies that users
   have. In this application setting, the definition of these relations determine
   the "data model" in the second sense.

Both of these types of "data models" are abstract, but to me there's a sense in
which the first definition is _more abstract_ than the second. The second type
of "data model" defines the logic for a particular application, while the first
type defines the logic for _defining other logics_. The second sense of "data
model" needs a rigorous definition of the first sense of "data model" before it
can begin to describe its object. (You can't design a social networking database
without a theory of what that database is, for example.)

#### 1.8 In the body of the chapter, I said that tables like those in Figs. 1.1
#### and 1.3 weren't relations as such but, rather, _pictures_ of relations. What
#### are some of the specific points of difference between such pictures and
#### the corresponding relations?

- Pictures of relations imply an order to the heading and the body, whereas
  headings and bodies are unordered by definition.

- Pictures of relations imply a positional relationship between a heading and
  a body, one in which the heading sits on top and the body unfurls beneath it.
  This positional relationship is irrelevant to relations, and is only
  a convention to help humans keep track of the correspondence between
  attributes and their values within tuples.

- Pictures of relations frequently omit the domain of attributes, opting
  instead to refer to them by their name. True attributes are pairs, involving
  a name and a domain over which the attribute is defined.

- Pictures of relations contain symbols corresponding to values, but they don't
  actually contain those values in and of themselves. (The suppliers-and-parts
  relation might contain a QTY value of 500, which would be depicted in the
  picture as "500", which is a symbol and not the literal value 500.)

#### 1.11 The following is an excerpt from a certain database textbook:
#### "[It] is important to make a distinction between stored relations, which
#### are _tables_, and virtual relations, which are _views_... [We] shall
#### use _relation_ only where a table or a view could be used. When we want
#### to emphasize that a relation is stored, rather than a view, we shall
#### sometimes use the term _base relation_ or _base table._" This text betrays
#### several confusions or misconceptions regarding the relational model.
#### Identify as many as you can.

- In the relational model, relations have no knowledge of how they are stored.
  If they did, the model wouldn't provide physical data independence!

- Related: the distinction between base relations and virtual relations has
  nothing to do with storage. Virtual relations are derived from base relations
  through relational expressions.

- The ambiguity between "relation" and "table" trips up the author in the
  second and third sentences. If a "table" is defined to be a relation that is
  stored on disk, and "base" is a modifier that specifies a relation is stored
  on disk, then the term "base table" provides no additional semantic
  meaning over "table." 

#### 1.13 Write `CREATE TABLE` statements for an SQL version of the
#### suppliers-and-parts database.

```sql

CREATE TYPE status AS ENUM ('10, 20, 30');
CREATE TYPE color AS ENUM ('Red', 'Green', 'Blue');

CREATE TABLE S (
    sno varchar(2) PRIMARY KEY,
    sname text,
    status status,
    city text 
);

CREATE TABLE P (
    pno varchar(2) PRIMARY KEY,
    pname text,
    color color,
    weight float,
    city text 
);

CREATE TABLE SP (
    sno sno REFERENCES S(sno),
    pno pno REFERENCES P(pno),
    qty integer
);
```

#### 1.14 The following is a typical SQL INSERT statement against the
#### suppliers-and-parts database:

```sql
INSERT INTO SP (SNO, PNO, QTY) VALUES ('S5', 'P6', 250);
```

#### Show an equivalent relational assignment operation.

An equivalent relational assignment might look something like the following
pseudocode:

```
SP := SP UNION ('S5', 'P6', 250);
```

#### 1.16 In the body of the chapter, I said that SQL doesn't support
#### relational assignment. Does it support it indirectly? If so, how so?
#### A related question: Can all relational assignments be expressed in terms
#### of INSERT and/or DELETE and/or UPDATE? If not, why not? What are the
#### implications?

SQL does support relational assignment, albeit indirectly! INSERT, DELETE, and
UPDATE functions all involve an implicit in-place assignment (see the
relational pseudocode in the answer to 1.14 for an example).

Not all relational assignments can be expressed in terms of INSERT, DELETE, and
UPDATE, however. None of these operators can actually _create_ relvars to which
we can assign relations. In SQL, CREATE TABLE gets exclusive rights to create
relvars.

The biggest consequence I can see from this situation, where SQL heavily
restricts variable assignment and mostly only allows an indirect version
through in-place operations, is that using variables is much more difficult in
SQL.
